=head1 NAME

B<prcs-utils> - Some utilities to be used in combination with PRCS.

=head1 PROGRAMS

=over 4

=item B<prcspatch>

Create a patch file ignoring the project descriptor.  patch file is
generated from diffs for working project and goes to stdout.

=item B<prcspatch2>

Create a patch file for project given on command line and two
revisions given on command line.  patch file contains differences
between given revisions and is named after project and the two
revisions.

=item B<prcsfind>

Should be used in combination with emacs's 'M-x grep' replace the
'grep -n' command with a call to prcsfind

=item B<prcsbranches>

Display the different branch names of a project.

usage : prcsbranches <project> or simply prcsbranches when a .prj
file is in cd.

=item B<prcsguess>

Tries to guess the project in a certain directory.  result on stdout,
return 1 if no successfull guess could be done, 2 in case of trouble.

=item B<prcsentry>

Give the contents of an entry of the project descriptor.
Usage:

    $ prcsentry Project-Description
    "A number of prcs related utilities."

=item B<prcsstatus>

Gives info about the status of files in a project.

=item B<prcs_checkfiles>

Check the file list in the prcs project file with the files (not
directories) in the current source tree.  Double checks the
populate-ignore list.

=item B<prcs-mv> <src> <dst>

Renames <src> into <dst>, both in the filesystem and in the prj file
(that's for everyday work)

=item B<prcs-mv> -p <src> <dst>

The same, but only impact prj file, and don't check anything in the
filesystem (used by prcs-assist-move, usable manually for renamings
that can't be guessed)

=item B<prcs-what-may-move>

Prints on stdout the list of files that are candidates for renaming
(those that would be ADDED or DELETED by "prcs populate -d") in a
format suitable as input for...

=item B<prcs-ttyask-move> <file1> <file2>

Takes from <file1> a list of candidate files for renaming, attempts to
match them based on their filenames (that is, only catch dir-hierarchy
reorgs), and asks the user what to do with matches (using perl
Term::Readline).  Records those renamings in <file2> along with
unchanged lines.

=item B<prcs-assist-move>

Runs prcs-ttyask-move on prcs-what-may-move output, then "prcs-mv -p"
on the files the user specified as renames.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

prcs(1)

=head1 AUTHOR

Hugo Cornelis <hugo@bbf.uia.ac.be> (prcs_checkfiles, prcspatch,
prcspatch2, prcsfind, prcsbranches, prcsguess, prcsentry)

Austin Donnelly <and1000@cam.ac.uk> (prcsstatus)

Yann Dirson <dirson@debian.org> (prcs-mv, prcs-what-may-move,
prcs-ttyask-move, and prcs-assist-move)

This manual page was written by Rafael Laboissiere <rafael@debian.org>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
